# EPA_fiscal
This document details the methods/inputs/outputs for the tool to calculate infrastructure efficiency.


# 01 Inputs to create the tool

1. Output data files detailed in the "rp" branch Readme of EPA_fiscal
2. Cost of infrastructure:  The cost of infrastructure at the per-unit level is indicated below.  For the most significant infrastructure cost - road costs, we use $25 / sq. ft. of road, which translates to roughly $3.1 mil. / lane mile for a two lane road, or $6.3 mil per lane-mile for a 4-lane road. These estimates are lower-end estimates from the American Road & Transportation Builders Association.  Costs for sidewalks, water mains, and sewer lines come from the experience of various fiscal impact studies conducted by Smart Growth America, and within range of values recommended by the State of Michigan.
      1. Road - $25/square foot 
      2. Sidewalk - $19/square foot
      3. Water main - $27/linear foot
      4. Sewer - $20/square foot


We recognize that costs may vary, and do so depending on scope, particularities of a project, and region. We recommend using a consistent set of figures, however, to enable comparison across projects. Users may judiciously override these figures to reflect locally-vetted figures only with substantial guidance from local engineering cost estimators or other experts. 

Lastly, this tool ascribes initial capital costs for infrastructure, plus a 20-year estimate of operations and maintenance (O&M) costs.  The O&M costs are calculated as 10% of real capital costs per year over a 20-year period, and discounted to present-value terms at a real discount rate of 3%.


# 02 Analysis steps

1. A linear regression model (equation 1) was created for each metro or micro area in the US using every 0.5 mile square cell within its boundary. This regression model identifies an estimated “infrastructure efficiency” (units of infrastructure per 24-hour population) as a function of local density (24 hour population per acre). 
  
  ln(IE) = K+b(ln(D))+error

The results of this function, infrastructure efficiency, are then used to calculate the infrastructure requirements (in physical units of infrastructure) by multiplying the infrastructure efficiency by the number of new residents plus employees generated by the project. 
Finally, an estimate of infrastructure cost is calculated by multiplying the cost estimates (dollars per unit, as shown above) by the estimated quantity of infrastructure needed to accommodate the new influx of employees. 

To summarize, the tool uses density to estimate infrastructure efficiency. That efficiency is multiplied by the population increase from the project to identify how many physical units of infrastructure items are needed. Given some per-unit costs factors, the tool then identifies infrastructure costs for both capital requirements and O&M. 

2. For the user interface of the app, the infrastructure efficiency estimates for the locations were aggregated to the Census block group level up from a 0.5 mile square foot level. The user then inputs the metro or micro area, the block group ID (12 digit FIPS code), the 24 hour population increase expected from the project, and has the option to adjust the cost of infrastructure which is already filled out with averaged values. 

3. The tool identifies road area (acres of road) as the main infrastructure requirement using a regression model at the 0.5 mile square cell. It then conducts certain imputations to identify sidewalk, sewer mains, and water mains estimates. 

To convert road area to sidewalk requirements, we identified a ratio of road area to sidewalk based on nine exemplary local governments for which we were able to find data for both factors at the block group level. To convert road requirements to sewer main estimates, we identified a ratio road centerline to linear-foot of sewer line for three local governments for which we had such data at the block group level.

Finally, we assume water main requirements are equal to sewer main requirements on a linear-foot level. 

The conversion factors we use are as follows:
      1. Road area to sidewalk: 0.01774 acre sidewalk/acre of road
      2. Road area to sewer main: 1.8850 feet of sewer main to linear meters of road center line (70 meters centerline/acre road)
      3. Road area to water main: Same as sewer main. 
      
4. Operating and maintenance costs - 3% discount rate per year, 10% of capital expenditure, 20 year time frame. 



# 03 Output results

Given the user inputs for Locations 1 and 2, the tool provides a collection of outputs for the user to consider. These include: 

      1. Infrastructure efficiency
      2. 24 hour population density (of entered block group ID)
      3. Road area
      4. Road cost
      5. O&M of road cost
      6. Sidewalk cost
      7. O&M of sidewalk
      8. Water main cost
      9. Sewer main cost
